I notice that
you say in your autobiography, Professor Revell,
that you grew up close to the sea and always were
attached to and had the mystery of the sea about
you. Is that your explanation for how you ended up
in oceanography? Not exactly. I was a graduate
student. I majored in geology at Pomona College.
Afterwards, I spent a year as a teaching assistant
in the geology department at Pomona. And then I
went to Berkeley as a graduate student in geology
and a teaching assistant there. And the then
director of the Scripps Institution a man named
Thomas Whalen Vaughan, came up to Berkeley
looking for a geologist, a graduate student in
geology, to spend a year at La Jolla looking at some
mud, mud that had been collected from the deep sea
floor by the non-magnetic yacht Carnegie.
Carnegie had a tragic end. It blew up in the harbor
of Apia in Samoa.
And the captain and the cabin boy were killed. the
ship was destroyed. But they had the good sense to
send all their samples off at every port they
stopped at. And they sent all their bottom
samples, as we used to call them, samples of the
bottom sediments.
They sent them back to Washington. A man named John
A. Fleming was then director of the Department of
Terrestrial Magnetism Carnegie Institution,
which was the operator of this non-magnetic
yacht, asked Braun if he or Pete, if the Scripps
Institution could examine these, if somebody at
Scripps could examine these sediments and write a
report on them. And Braun came to Berkeley looking
for somebody to do this. And there were two of us who
tried for the job, a man named Bill Rand and I.
Interestingly enough, both of us ended up
involved with the ocean. Bill Rand was the
operator of various kinds of equipment for the oil
companies, for underwater oil exports.
I got the job. And the reason I applied for the job
was basically because I was about to get married to
a woman named Ellen Clark, who was a Scripps
College student and niece of Ellen Browning
Scripps, more or less the patron saint of La Jolla.
And she had this house right here that her mother
had. It didn't look much like this then, but it was
in this location, and the central part was there.
We'd come down here in the summertime, if you feel.
during our courting period, starting in 1927.
And she was just graduating from Scripps, and we
were just about to get married. And we thought it
would be a good way to spend the first year of our
married life here in La Jolla, where she was born,
and where she'd spend her summer. So I applied for
the job and got it. At that time, the Scripps
Institution was a very small place. There were
only five graduate students.
And I believe there were only five faculty
members. And the total staff, counting the
students in the faculty, was about 30 people.
And I started looking at these muds and learning
about how you look at muds.
Two of the other graduate students were a man named
Richard Fleming, Richard Howell Fleming. who
spent the last 25 years, I guess, thereabouts at
the Oceanographic Laboratories of the
University of Washington. There was a man named
Maynard Harding. I don't really know what became
of him. They were both chemists. And one
afternoon, Dick Fleming came into my lab, the lab I
was sitting in, and said, Well, you're the new boy
here, and we're supposed to go to sea tomorrow and
take an oceanographic station.
And I said, OK. We got up about 2 o'clock in the
morning. We were all living out there at the
Scripps Institution. We had this group of little
cottages around the laboratory building, which
had been built in 1960. Dick Fleming lived in one of
these, and Ellen and I lived in another. He wasn't
married then.
They came and picked me up about 2, 2.30 in the
morning. We drove down to San Diego to Point Loma,
where the Scripps Institution ship was tied up.
The ship was an ex-purse singer called the
Scripps, about 65 feet long. It had one
professional crew member, a guy named Murdoch
Ross, a Scottish railroad engineer. And he'd come
down to San Diego from British Columbia. I always
used to say his idea of keeping a ship in good shape
is to keep it covered with grease like a
locomotive.
That wasn't quite true. But he was primarily a
railroad engineer, not in any way But he ran the
engine. And then we three were the crew, Harding
and Fleming and I. We started out about 3.30 in the
morning and went off Point Loma about 15 miles to a
deep area which is known as the San Diego Craw.
And we started to take a station. Scripps had a
program. started by one of the faculty members
named Eric Moberg, the chemist, to make weekly
observations of the nutrients in the water, the
phosphate and the silica and the nitrate, and the
oxygen content of the water, and the temperature
and salinity of the water, and to collect plankton
samples. And we did this by stopping in one place
and taking a series of vertical samples at
different depths. This one sample of each of about
15 depths. This used to be called, probably still
is called, an oceanographic station.
Along about 11 o'clock in the morning, the other
guy said, well, you're the new boy, so it's your job
to cook dinner. So I went down to the galley, and I
Scripps has always had a policy of feeding very
well. We had steak and boiled potatoes and lettuce
and tomato salad. It was a very good, simple lunch.
And the other guys came down and ate this dinner in
absolute silence, not saying a word. Neither good
nor bad, they just ate it. That's the way sailors
are. They hardly ever say much when they're
eating. And after about 10 minutes, after they'd
finished wolfing it down, they got up and said,
well, it makes us seasick down here. We better go up
topside again. You better do the dishes. I didn't
get seasick. Well, I stayed and did the dishes and
cleaned up. Went back up and we finished the
station. And we came in back to San Diego. And I
remember we got back just about dusk. Must have
been about 7, 38 o'clock in the evening. And this
was an absolutely marvelous experience. I'd
never really been on a ship before in my life. I'd
gone down to the beach in the summertime. We lived
in Pasadena, and I was a little boy. We lived in
Redondo Beach. And we'd go down to Balboa in the
summertime. I'd really never been on a ship
before, except the old Congress that was there.
pastor's team had sailed up and down the West
Coast. This was such a wonderful experience that I
decided right then and there I wanted to be an
oceanographer, because you have this marvelous
business of doing science and being a sailor at the
same time. So after that, we went out quite
regularly on the Scripps.
was an old purse sinker. That's an old fishing
boat. A fishing boat was used off this coast, a
special kind of a net called a purse
sinker. And we never went very far. But we used to
organize cruises to sail in the Southern
California waters about 100 miles offshore and
about 150 miles north of here and a little ways to
the south. of studying the ocean,
essentially the water, the water conditions off
the California coast. After a couple of years,
this is 1931, about 1933
or 1934, I didn't see so much that I actually became
the skipper of this little vessel. a small boat
operator's license up at San Pedro.
So I was in charge. By that time, we had a cook as well
as an engineer. And I was the assistant engineer at
first. I used to, when we were on these cruises that
lasted a week or more, I would spell the engineer,
where he brought,
in the engine room. And later, we had this cook.
Frank, I've forgotten his last
name.
And I used to insist that we keep the ship clean. And
I bossed the other graduate students around. And
there's research assistants around. Some were
not actually graduate students. But they didn't
like it very well. I was
fairly naughty. very much like a skipper should
be, I guess. But anyhow, we all got along. And
we went on several of these small cruises lasting a
week to two weeks, coming into port in San Clemente
Island and Santa Monica, Santa Cruz Island, San
Nicolas, and Santa Rosa.
Santa Barbara Island. This is really in Catalina,
too. We used to anchor at the Iskansaw Catalina.
These were marvelous things to do. And finally,
1936, after five years of this, I finally got
through looking at this goddamn mud and got my
doctor's degree at Berkeley. The Scripps
Institution was then part of the Graduate School
at Berkeley, the outlying field station.
In the meantime, I've done quite a bit of work with
Moberg and Fleming on the chemistry of seawater,
particularly. Fleming and I did some work on the
solubility of calcium carbonate in seawater, one
of the earliest papers published on that. And
Moberg and Greenberg, Revell and Allen published
a paper on the buffer mechanism of seawater. I was,
I was, my contribution to this was to show that
boric acid is part of the buffer system of sea
water. It's not only calcium, carbonate, the
carbonates and bicarbonates and the cations like
calcium and sodium, but also there's some effect
of boric acid and that changes the the
relationship between pH and the amount of
carbonate in the water. And about 1933, Dr.
Vaughan went on a year's sabbatical. He was
chairman of a committee of the National Academy of
Sciences to look at oceanographic institutions
all over the world. And I was really lagging way
behind looking at this mud. I was doing all these
other things on ocean chemistry.
And he wrote a letter back to Dr. Moberg, who was
acting director of Scritch, saying, we've just
got to get this fellow Revell back on the job of
looking at this mud. Otherwise, maybe we'll have
to fire him. And this was right in the middle of the
Depression, 31 to 36.
And then Moberg was very much against that,
because he thought I was doing OK, even though I was
looking at the mud.
I was doing OK.
And at
one time during this period, the University of
California was very short of money. And they were
thinking that they would have to fire all the
research assistants down here. Because I
remember the faculty actually took a cut in their
own salaries. So they could
keep on.
In order to keep the research assistants on, I
believe the faculty actually took a voluntary
reduction salary. Another couple, and Ellen and
I, were trying to prepare ourselves in case we did
get laid off. Her mother had a lemon grove up near
Riverside, and we went up to look at that and see if
we could live there and farm that, or grow lemons in
that lemon grove. It was not a very promising
prospect. Anyhow, they didn't lay us off, so we
stayed on.
I finally got my thesis written on the marine
bottom samples collected by the yacht Carnegie. I
got my PhD in the spring of 1936 at Berkeley.
That was when the Scripps Institution was part of
the graduate division of the University of
California at Berkeley. UCLA didn't have a
graduate division just when they graduated.
And it was clear that I was quite determined to stay
on, so they promoted me to instructor.
My salary went from $1,200 a year to $1,800.
And I was an instructor. I continued being an
instructor until the war came along, and I went on
active duty in the Navy. That's in 1941, though.
Between 36 and 41, what sort of projects did you
work on at Scripps?
Well, the first year, after from 36 to 37, And our
whole family went to Norway, where I had what would
now be called a post-doctoral
fellowship, although we paid for it, at the
Geophysical Institute in Bergen.
And the man, Dr. Vaughan, retired in 1936, the
summer that I by my PhD. His place was taken by
Harold Sperger, who was a great Norwegian
oceanographer, probably the best oceanographer
of his time in physical oceanography. The
Norwegians were leaders in physical
oceanography for about 50 years, about 40 years, I
think, because of the influence of a man named
Willem Bjerknes. who was a theoretical
physicist, who especially was hydrodynamics.
And he invented,
well, he really applied hydrodynamics to
planetary circulation, to both the ocean and the
atmosphere.
And there was a whole group of Scandinavians at
that time. Alfred Ekman was the better of the
so-called Ekman spiral, which is the theoretical
way that a wind-driven current turns to the right
of the northern hemisphere as you go deeper in a
spiral. And Bjorn Helen Hansen, who was
essentially a descriptive physical
oceanographer, he was particularly concerned
with the accuracy and variability of
observations He'd been a colleague of Fridtjof
Nansen, the explorer and world citizen, who had
invented something called the Nansen bottle,
which is a bottle for sampling the water at
different depths, an ingenious device for
closing the bottle by the weight that you dropped
on the cable when you wanted to close it. Helen
Hansen used these Nansen bottles and reversing
thermometers to make very accurate measurements
of temperature. And the water samples that they
collected, they could make very accurate
measurements of salinity. And from these, it was
possible to compute the densities, the surfaces
of equal density in the ocean and the surfaces of
equal pressure or pressure differential.
And
those people in Scandinavia, particularly
Bjerkes and his followers, developed the theory
of
pressure-driven circulation in the ocean, in
which the pressure gradient was balanced against
Coriolis force, not really a force,
Because of the Earth's rotation, the currents
turn it parallel to the pressure gradient instead
of right angles to it, or nearly parallel. The real
balancing force, of course, is the force of
friction. But the only way you can get that to
balance is to have the current running very close
to parallel to the surface of equal pressure,
running along the hill instead of down the hill.
And this theory of pressure-driven currents was
an equilibrium theory. It didn't allow for what we
call convergence or divergence.
You had to have continuity at every plane, every
horizontal plane. Whereas what actually happens
is that in some places the water converges and
sinks or rises. In other places, they have
divergence. Actually, if you have convergence,
the water sinks. If you have divergence, the water
rises and spreads out. And that's this theory that
didn't account for that. Equine's theory, on the
other hand, was based upon stress,
but likewise based on the balance between
Coriolis force and the stress of the wind.
friction, the friction of the wind on the sea
surface. And again, that's a second order.
Essentially, as a second order effect,
the viscous friction in the water, so-called
turbulent friction.
And there was a man named
Otto Pettersson in Sweden, who'd done a good deal
of oceanographic observation.
Great Dane, who worked out, a man named Martin
Knudsen, who worked out the methods of measuring
salinity very accurately. And the tables, the
so-called Knudsen's tables, that enable you to
translate temperature and salinity into
density.
Eklund was involved with that, too. And at the same
time, there were a lot of great meteorologists
there. Bergen, Jock Bjerknes, Willem Bjerknes'
son, and his name's Farah Pettersson. Carl Gustav
Rosby was a Swede who'd come to the United States,
but he was really part of the Scandinavian school.
Although he spent quite a bit of time at MIT.
So during the early part of this century and up
until after World War II, the principle,
the leaders in this kind of physical
oceanography, the study of the currents, or what
used to call the motions of the oceans, were all
Scandinavians, mostly Norwegians, but some
Swedes, some Danes, and some Germans. And there
was also a great Austrian named Albert Defant,
D-F-A-N-T.
A German named Meritz, and another one named
Buist. Buist was primarily a descriptive
oceanographer.
All these people attended a meeting of the
International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics in
Edinburgh. in 1936.
And I met them for the first time there. Except for
Sferter. Sferter would come out here with his wife
and child and daughter. And I met him out here just
briefly before we left.
And it turned out, actually, that I would have done
better just to stay here and work with him. But we
had, in terms of research and learning,
We had a wonderful time in Norway, and the first
time either of us had ever been outside the United
States. We had our two small daughters with us. One
of them was about four years old, and one was about
three and a half, and one was about six months. Then
we went there, and of course, a year later when we
came back, our oldest daughter got so she talked
English with a strong Norwegian accent
Our youngest daughter was quite ill, had
diarrhea. And
she just got thinner and thinner and punier and
punier. And I remember one night, we
were very worried about her. And I got on the
streetcar. We lived in a place called Hope, just
outside of Bergen, next to another little suburb
called Paradise. I got in the street car and went
into town, and I see a woman doctor named Johanna
Scram Anderson. I was scared to death that Mary was
really sick.
And she gave me some fruit juice called Saft, and
she said, give the child some of this several times
a day. We did, and she got well
before the days of antibiotics. or even sulfur
drugs, I guess. I'm not quite sure about that.
One of the people that we became very good friends
with was one of the couples we became very good
friends with were Jaak and Hedvig Bjerknes. Jaak
Bjerknes was the inventor of the theory of air mass
analysis. During World War I, he had the job of
running what they called the Baerbarsling and
Baubest line of weather forecasting for Western
Norway. Of course, there weren't any ship, very
few ship reports, because the radios were all
silent. And he had somehow to make forecasts for
the fishing vessels. And he developed this theory
of the polar, of the air mass front, fronts between
air masses. Air mass is a different physical
characteristic. One air mass is a slightly cold
front in which the cold air slid under the warm air
in the warm front which the warm air slid up over the
cold air and i learned something quite
fundamental from him that was that you must leave a
good scientist really lets nature take the lead
that is that he would he would never try to force the
weapon never try to have a to have a theory about it
or have a predilection about it. He'd just lie back
and let nature tell him what was going to happen.
And this was remarkable. It said to rain 32 days out
of every month in Bergen. It does rain. It does rain
every day.